The video is part of a one-month Dzogchen retreat held from April 11 to May 10, 2025.
The video discusses the ultimate nature of the mind and attainings buddh
in the rainbow light body.
and the ultimate nature of the mind and attainings buddh.
The video discusses the ultimate nature of the mind and attainings buddh.
The video discusses the ultimate nature of the mind and attainings buddh and attainings buddh.
The gracious teacher of the Buddha Shakyamuni, his light, his kindness, his teachings.
We are lighted out, we discover our long lost or long ignored treasures.
We bring out, that's called it.
This treasure is not just treasure to our own self,
treasure for all the beings, to every living being.
Share that through those with joy, appreciation, confidence,
and then recognize these inequalities
and take this joining, this praise, and then recite this praise.
Then as many as you can do even each session.
In the teaching mentioned, mentioned over a hundred thousand times.
That means that much we meditate, that much we are connected to our treasures,
our inner treasures, treasures.
We are really activating our own treasures, glorifying our treasures,
repolishing our treasures, cherishing our treasures.
How wonderful, how beautiful.
Feel that and then find this.
After that, then in the teaching says, "Receive all the blessing, light, and the kingdom."
All that refuge to your kingdom is dissolved
in the light and merged to your self, to your own nature of the mind,
to your own nature of the three Gaya status.
Status and meditating as much as you have time.
Relax on that status.
Then the next one is the bodhicitta.
I mentioned and of course you all know,
the external bodhicitta, the relative bodhicitta,
which hurts so many times.
Wishing bodhicitta and then actualizing bodhicitta.
Those both are known as relative bodhicitta.
First is wishing bodhicitta.
And that is wishing bodhicitta is as we mentioned,
a good heart, a good heart for all living beings.
That good heart is wishing bodhicitta, sizzling quality,
waking up that beautiful treasure in the midst of all the ego,
habit patterns, clothes, is really waking up now.
Coming out, coming out, that is wishing bodhicitta.
Read that thought and then take rafuji vows.
All rafuji pray, all sorry bodhicitta vows.
And taking, not sorry, rafuji is the foundation of all the practices.
Now if we don't have the rafuji vows, rafuji practices,
we won't have the bodhicitta according to teaching.
The foundation of the bodhicitta,
no matter whichever schools you are, is rafuji.
So we the rafuji and then we take the bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta, and bodhicitta vow is wishing bodhicitta.
Wishing bodhicitta.
And in order to do wishing bodhicitta,
then we have to activate wishing bodhicitta,
which is called activating bodhicitta.
And then of course those are translated in slightly different ways,
that you all know slightly.
But what it is, first is intention,
and then they take the vows, and then wishing activating bodhicitta.
Activating bodhicitta is, then literally bodhicitta is six paramata,
best upon the poor, immeasurable as is.
All that means, best upon the wishing bodhicitta,
you perform the six paramata practices.
Six paramata practice.
A six paramata practice is also known as accumulating merits.
We are often heard, in order to reach enlightenment,
in order to dispel all our heavy load of the duality and habit patterns,
we need to get up to the two merits.
Merit is a force.
Merit is a powerful wind.
Merit is powerful like fire.
Fire that will burn, skee, clean way, clear way.
Like water, spring water, clear way.
That, that is merit.
Merit, merit is then six paramata,
best upon the, this poor, immeasurable.
Immeasurable, that is.
Then, among that, always in the teaching highlight,
in this teaching highlight, three morality.
Morality, three, morality, of course,
every those six paramata has three, divided into three, three, three.
But morality, in the highlight of that, is three moralities.
The morality that avoid those three are,
morality that will avoiding all the negative activities.
By body, by speech, and by mind.
Avoid all negative activities.
That is generally the morality.
In the Buddha teaching, gracious teacher,
Buddha Shakyam in the teaching, is conduct.
Conduct of the body, conduct of the speech.
And that then, of course, all those two conductors
are relying with the conduct of the mind.
Mind is the instrumental.
Behind the scenes, ruled every other conduct.
So, conduct of the mind.
Avoid negative activities.
That is number, I mean, not number one, or one of the morality.
Second morality, of course, many of you already know.
The performing, or gathering, all the virtuous activities.
Morality that gathers all the virtuous, positive activities.
By body, by speech, and by mind.
By.
And what is that virtues?
Virtues, by body.
Virtues, performing good deeds by the body.
Good activities.
Military activities.
Supported to the communities.
Supported to the monasteries.
Supported to the congregations.
Something, serviced to the others, that will fail.
Or serviced to the three dual in the Buddha teaching of the religion.
Buddha, Dharma, Sanghas.
And then virtuous activity of the speech.
What?
Polite.
Kind world.
Polite world.
Gentle world.
Respect.
Also, physical activity.
Also, in the great master, Shanti Devas.
When you look to the Shanti beings or the other beings,
look with eye of compassion and respect, joy.
Nice.
Smiling.
And it's looking gently and respectfully.
People know what they call the body language.
Others know us.
Kind of more gentle.
More peaceful.
More polite.
More nice.
All those are known as positive.
Even in the teaching of the great master, Shanti Devas.
Even you have to indicate something by not just say this and that kind of so shortly.
But gently swinging your right arm.
In the teaching mentioned, right arm is considered a kind of respect arm.
So gently swinging your right arm and showing that people can relate.
Indicating whatever that worry with the gentle world.
Those are all known as respectful.
Riches, activities.
And then, well, the virtues of the mind is love and compassion, kindness, all that.
So the guide and all the virtues activate the boat.
And that is second morality.
Third morality is, is then performing all the beneficial activities.
That whatever you can do.
Benefit.
Healthy.
Best of all with the good heart.
Best of all with the body.
Whatever you can do.
According to your capabilities.
According to your readiness.
Not overdo.
But do.
Don't stop.
Do whatever you can do.
Do that with joy.
Do that with respectfully.
Do that with politely.
And when you did that, also you feel upward.
Or we feel upward.
We're happy in joy.
I did something good.
Feel happy.
And dedicated that merit.
May I be able to do that more to benefit all living beings.
As a gracious teacher, Buddha Shaktamani and all those great masters.
All that such as Avalokkadishara.
Mejishi, Vaitya Pani.
Even though they reach enlightenment.
Long time ago,
personally in the teaching measure,
they are acting as bodhisattva or to benefit more outreach to all living beings.
That was the teaching said.
So, kind of having those beautiful intentions taught.
And then, take the bodhisattva vows.
So those are kind of brilliant.
Again, I'm highly highlighted.
Bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva, relative bodhisattva.
With that, then all the parameters keeping practice.
Those are known as then.
Known as the bodhisattvas or relative bodhisattvas.
And then here too.
On this absolute bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva practices here.
Also in the teaching, mentioned that and you see here.
Said here, whole.
That all beings with their temporary computations.
So that is really the why we develop bodhisattva.
In this absolute bodhisattva.
Because all the beings,
beings, they're temporarily confused.
This temporary is, of course, not forever.
But it's this temporary is a long time.
When these are composed.
When we sent in beings are composed.
According to the teaching, we composed from the beginning times.
We composed.
Since that completion times,
until now, all the sentient beings are struggling.
Struggling to fix the comfortable zones.
Zones.
Everyone is looking for comfortable zones.
Something can feel secured.
Something happy.
Something really feel peaceful.
But yet, not everyone is achieving that.
Even they got something for a short time is not secured.
Is not long.
It's just the only temporary.
Boss temporary comfort, otherwise is all kidding.
Why?
Because of duality.
Consumption we created.
One's own self by ourself.
For that reason,
Grand Master Chantideva said in his teaching.
Even every living beings are longing to have happiness.
Happiness and peaceful joy.
But that very cause of happiness joy that what they have.
They're destroying without knowing by themselves.
Thinking is good for us.
With ignorance.
So therefore, what Grand Master Chantideva said.
How pathetic.
All the living beings sending me.
Thinking I'm doing something good for myself to feel happy and joy.
To kind of create more permanent, some degree happiness.
But yet, that very cause is they're destroying by the ignorance.
Ignorance.
And that ignorance is activated in the five emotions that we know.
All four emotions.
Anger.
Jealous.
Hated thoughts.
Self-important.
Greeds.
Brides.
And between the combination of those, then anxieties.
Worries.
Sadness.
Unscured.
That endless.
Goes on and on.
Even in we human beings.
Human beings are considering, not considering.
In the greatest teacher, Buddha Kya Kya Manu said.
Higher realm.
We in higher realms.
Even we have all that things.
And even everything is a comfort.
Everything is perfect due to our own ego-clinging in the self-important and the greedy.
Greedy we destroy.
We spoil ourselves.
And they're trying to point their finger to someone else and create more troubles.
More troubles.
We do that.
So many times.
Why?
Because of the ignorance.
Because of this attachment.
And the greed.
How that long going to last that long?
How long?
Not forever according to the teacher.
Temporary, that's what the teacher said.
But even this temporary, they're going through all the difficulties, troubles.
For that reason, this is a great docking practitioner.
All the, in the absolute level, feel great compassion.
I'm going to help you to all them.
I'm going to help you to wake up them to the origin their energy, natural status,
pre-prong all these delusions.
Delusions.
For that reason, that I'm going to meditate on this natural or on the toxic status.
That's scared.
And have those good attitude or intention toward and join this place.
Then I'm joined.
And again, meditate this.
More meditating on this status.
Start this great body practice with compassion.
Kindness, compassion, thoughts.
And understand exactly the situation and circumstance what is going through.
That we can see our own outreach of these pipe senses.
We can see so many purpose.
Even this country is considering the best country on this earth,
or one of the best country on this earth.
But how many peoples are really going through challenges?
Through that.
And don't make in other countries how many things.
And then everything of all other realms.
Hell realms.
Hungry goat realms.
Animal realms.
And animal realms.
How many animals are suffering?
How many animals are really also going?
All the challenges.
So many troubles.
That.
And they gain intention.
Everyone, same.
The happy and joy, peace, like to comfort.
But that, all that.
Because of this situation.
All that.
Igniting on the great compassion of the relative truth.
Loving kindness.
Really poor, boneless thoughts.
And then activating for the greater joyful effort.
For the dharma.
Greater joyful effort for the practice.
Meditate.
Helping to them.
Meditate with that intention.
Intention.
And then.
This is the practices.
This is all these delusions.
All these conclusions.
Start with ignorance.
How is going to liberate it?
How going to play with that?
Self-liberating.
Self-liberating is not going to use some other antidotes.
And spell.
Some other antidotes.
Who created that advice?
Use simple word.
Create by the mind.
Who going to buy clever that by mind?
This is the last word.
Called homopedic techniques.
Homopedic techniques.
Use the same remedies.
Remedy to cleave it.
With the same technique.
Techniques.
So that is it.
For therefore, it is self-liberating.
Wisdom.
The mind.
Well-liberated.
Cleave it.